Let's all stand together and sing to our King who fights our battles for us, he's victorious,
he's the Lord of Lords, let's worship him today, let's sing together.
When all I see is the battle, you see my victory.
When all I see is the bout, you see about him.
And as I walk through the shadows, your love surrounds me.
There's nothing to fear now, for I am safe with you.
I know when I'll fly out, but I know my knees with my heads lifted high.
Oh God, the battle belongs to you.
And everything I lay at your feet, I'll sing through the night.
And if you were for me, who could be against me?
For Jesus, there's nothing impossible for you.
When all I see of the ashes, you see the beauty.
When all I see is the cross, but you see every day.
So when I'll fly out, fight on my knees with my heads lifted high.
Oh God, the battle belongs to you.
Every fear I lay at your feet, I'll sing through the night.
And Almighty for our trust, you go before us.
Nothing can stand against the power of our God.
You shine in the shadow, you win every battle.
Almighty for our trust, you go before us.
Nothing can stand against the power of our God.
You shine in the shadow, you win every battle.
Almighty for our trust, you go before us.
Nothing can stand against the power of our God.
You shine in the shadow, you win every battle.
So when I'll fly out, fight on my knees with my head lifted high.
Oh God, the battle belongs to you.
Every fear I lay at your feet, I'll sing through the night.
Oh you are holiness, oh we bring you faith.
A thousand generations, falling down and worship,
sing the song of ages through the night.
It's all with God before us, it's all we'll believe.
We'll sing the song of ages through the night.
Your name, your name is the highest.
Your name is the greatest.
Your name stands above the law.
Your pros and dominions on house and positions.
And the angels cry, holy, our creation cries.
Holy, you are lifted high.
Holy, only forever.
If you've been forgiven, if you've been redeemed,
sing the song forever through the night.
And if you walk in free, and if you bear His name,
You'll sing the song forever as it may,
and the angels cry, holy, our creation cries.
Holy, you are lifted high.
Holy, only forever.
Your people sing, holy, to the King of kings.
Holy, you will always be, holy, holy forever.
Your name, your name is the highest.
Your name is the greatest.
Your name stands above the law.
Your pros and dominions on house and positions.
Your name is the highest.
Your name is the greatest.
Your name stands above the law.
Your pros and dominions on house and positions.
And the angels cry, holy, our creation cries.
Holy, you are lifted high.
Holy, only forever.
Your people sing, holy, to the King of kings.
Holy, you will always be, holy, holy forever.
And you will always be, holy, holy forever.
You are holy and so holy.
Amen. Well, we can sing that song with confidence,
knowing that God is holy, holy forever,
that His name will last forever, that He is set apart.
The description in the book of Revelation is
that the angels bow down and worship Him
and they say, holy, holy, holy.
Yet He's a God that cares about us,
that's involved in our lives,
that knows the individual aspects of what we're going through
and wants to help us grow and transform us
into the person that He wants us to be.
We got to celebrate this last night
as we had our rooted graduates here.
They ended their 10 week experience and celebrated them
and we saw the transformation.
We heard stories and story after story of people
that said, I signed up for this
and I was hoping for this and God did this.
The individual transformation that takes place in each life
is because of a God that is holy.
It's also because of a people that have said
we're going to be generous in our response
to what God is doing and we're going to jump in
in any way that we feel led.
It's your generosity and your worship
and your offering that you have brought
that allows things like rooted to take place.
For those of you that are in life groups,
you know that rooted is the first 10 weeks of a life group
and you get connected to your church
and the people around you and God
and learn more about yourself.
We get to see that transformation take place
because of the generosity here at Harbor Point.
If you want to jump in and participate in that,
there's ways on the screens behind me
that you can jump in and play a part in that generosity.
I want you to see in just a minute on the screens behind me,
you're going to watch cardboard testimonies.
If you know about rooted,
cardboard testimony is a chance to look back
on where we were 10 weeks ago.
What we were is that person
and what we're experiencing going through
and how we've been transformed and changed by God,
a holy God that cares about us today.
So you're going to see that in the next song in just a little bit.
Would you pray with me as we continue in our service?
Father, we thank you.
We thank you, God, that you are holy.
We sing, we raise our hands,
we proclaim that truth through song today,
knowing that you are holy and you care about us.
You want to transform our lives
because you have a picture of who we can be.
And Lord, you're engaged and in our lives
and we praise you for that.
Father, we respond and are offering now
as a worship to you.
And God, we give it to you because we know
that you can take it and use it
to continue to transform more and more lives.
We thank you for who you are.
We ask that you be with us now
and shape us and form us
as we continue in our service and worship today.
Senior Sons, let me pray. Amen.
And out of the wilderness, into your little neighborhoods,
all look where I'm standing now.
Yes, look where I'm standing now.
I stand on shame breaking, miracle making,
the powerful name of Jesus.
On the body raised, prodigal saved, powerful name of Jesus.
Jesus.
Left by your mighty hand, into the promised land.
Look where I'm standing now.
You carried the cross for me.
Now I am a child of the King.
Oh, look where I'm standing now.
Look where I'm standing now.
I stand on shame breaking, miracle making,
the powerful name of Jesus.
On the body raised, prodigal saved,
powerful name of Jesus.
Oh.
Hallelujah, I'm free.
Jesus must say the rescue me.
Hallelujah, Jesus must say the rescue me.
Hallelujah, I'm free.
I stand on shame breaking, miracle making,
the powerful name of Jesus.
On the body raised, prodigal saved,
powerful name of Jesus.
I stand on the shame breaking, miracle making,
the powerful name of Jesus.
On the body raised, prodigal saved,
powerful name of Jesus.
Oh, Hallelujah, I'm free.
Hallelujah, I'm free.
Hallelujah, Jesus must say the rescue me.
Hallelujah.
Oh, Hallelujah.
Give him praise.
Oh, come on, if you are free, if you've been set free,
lift up a shout of praise unto Jesus this morning in bed.
Hallelujah, Hallelujah.
So good, so good to worship together.
Welcome to Harbor Point.
There are so many dads throughout the room.
Happy Father's Day to you all.
Beautiful people all throughout the room.
Why don't you turn to your neighbor,
give somebody a high five.
You can grab a seat.
Oh, wow, you're taking this serious.
The whole thing's about being serious.
Apparently you're not ready to be serious.
Let me lower this so you can hear my joke appropriately.
I can hear.
Okay.
All right, I'm going to put my down a little bit.
Is that your first joke?
That was it.
Look at it.
Okay.
All right.
I got to get in the zone.
Like I said, I'm not at a disadvantage.
I laugh at my own jokes, but I'm competitive.
So the two things are going head to head here.
Give me your worst.
Look at me.
Oh, I'm right here.
I am right here and you're right here.
Okay, how am I going to do this one?
We're crossing our eyes.
Yes.
Elevating the humor level to the next.
When I cross my eyes, I can't remember my joke.
Okay, I remember now.
After you read it, you remembered it.
Did I get a point there?
What did one eye say to the other eye?
I don't know.
There's something between us that smells.
Does it quiver?
Count.
He's quivering.
Quivering too.
You're quivering.
Okay.
Oh, that's a laugh.
It's a wash.
Okay.
Let's see here.
I'm reading a horror story in Braille.
How are you?
Yeah.
Something bad is going to happen.
I can feel it.
Thank you for moving that.
Now I can see your face.
What do you call a paper airplane?
I can't fly.
I do not know.
Ready?
Stationary.
Do you have a bad morning?
What's going on?
I'll tell you, the morning would be great if I heard some humor around here, but apparently,
that's not what we're doing.
I went to buy some camouflage pants the other day.
Okay.
I couldn't find any.
Stop throwing stuff at me.
I asked the librarian if the library had any books on paranoia and she leaned in and
whispered, they're right behind you.
Dang it.
That's two points for you that I've lost on my own joke.
Yeah.
This is easy.
At this point, because you can't resist this right here, if you feel like someone is watching
you, you're not alone.
Dude, that was probably for you.
What did Mario say to Princess Peach when he dumped her?
Mario.
It's not you.
It's a me, Mario.
No, come on.
I have so many more.
What's the difference between curtains and toilet paper?
I don't know.
So it was you?
No, that's it.
That's it.
I'm done.
I'm happy to go out on that one.
All right.
Top shelf humor for you guys that are new with us every week.
We do that kind of stuff.
We just set the bar.
I know it's incredible.
Great to be with you guys.
Happy Father's Day.
It is Father's Day.
In case you didn't know, happy Father's Day.
Okay.
I just want to say, I don't want to compare days for parents here, but if we did that
on Mother's Day, it would have been like a wave.
So I just want to say one more time, happy Father's Day.
Yeah.
Right.
Exactly.
So in all seriousness, this is my 20th Father's Day, which is really bizarre to think about.
And you're just like, wow, I didn't know he was that old.
Yeah, now you know.
But yeah, my 20th Father's Day.
And in all seriousness, I just want to tell you, and this is really, really crucial, you
guys, dads matter.
Dads matter.
The church and the world needs fathers and grandfathers, and it needs fathers and father
figures, and so it matters.
And if you're wondering if you're doing a great job, you'll probably never know if you're
doing a great job.
But let me just say, if you're showing up, that's half of it.
The rest of it you can figure out.
Just showing up is half of it.
And so I'm grateful for you guys.
Keep being dads and grandfathers and father figures to so many people.
We need you guys.
All right.
Cool.
Good.
Yeah.
All right.
If you're new with us, my name is Jeff.
I'm one of the pastors here.
I want to tell you as if you're new, again, I know there's a lot of places you could be.
There's like brunch plans you had.
There was, you know, all kinds of stuff you were planning on doing today.
And your dad was like, we're going to church.
And it was like, oh, I got to go, I guess, or something like that.
Or maybe you were coerced or brought or tricked or however bribed you, however you wound up
here.
I want to let you know that my favorite thing about our church is the people you're sitting
around.
There's a lot of great stuff that happens on this stage.
But the best stuff that happens in our church is always with the people that you're sitting
around.
And people will tell me over and over again, their favorite thing is the people they met.
They'll say, I'm like, did you not, there's something else going on the stage here?
Like, yeah, yeah, that was fine.
They were great.
They just seemed like a place where I could come and show up and kind of, you know, be
myself and all that, all that sort of stuff.
And I just want to say, that's so true.
In fact, you're sitting around a group of people who are incredibly generous.
And as we kind of like wind down our fiscal year, which ends at the end of June, you know,
as we look at what that looks like, I just want to say we've done, gosh, you guys have
enabled us to do so many incredible things.
And as we look forward to the future, I just want to make sure you're clear.
And I just, you know, from my own heart to you guys, A, that I'm incredibly grateful.
B, if you're a person who's like, hearing us talk about generosity, you're like, yeah,
they talk about it all the time.
It's like, we're not ashamed of it.
The Bible isn't ashamed of it.
Jesus isn't ashamed of it.
So we talk about it.
And we have a belief about generosity that it's transformative.
And so if you're a person who's like, look, I'm all, I'm all, I'm okay with being generous.
I just don't want to give to the church.
I don't really, I don't know if I trust you guys at all.
It's okay.
Here, take my kids for an hour, but you can't have and I don't, but I don't trust you.
Yeah.
I get there's a little, that's fine.
But I just want to say, in all seriousness, if you're a person who's like, maybe you got
wounded by a church in the past, some sort of financial thing, you know, some pastor
absconded with some money or did something weird or whatever with, I just want to say,
I get that it's really, it's difficult.
And you worked hard to whatever this is that you've earned, you worked hard to get that.
And I just want to say, if you're a person who's like, I can't give to the church because
I don't, I don't really trust what you guys do with this or whatever, you know, like I
don't trust it.
Don't let that be a reason why you're not generous at all.
In other words, I have such a high, I believe that the Bible is pretty clear.
We should be a part of what God's doing in the local church community, but if you can't
for whatever reason, don't let that be a reason why you can't be generous somewhere else.
And to the degree that it's sacrificially, joyfully generous somewhere else.
Find somewhere else that's making an eternal difference in the world and give sacrificially
to it because there are some things that God can only do when we're with our generosity,
with our sacrificial generosity.
You want to join the generosity journey here?
Great.
If you don't, don't let that be a reason not be generous period.
Find a way to be generous.
Everybody cool?
Does that make sense?
All right.
We on board with that?
Okay.
Cool.
Yeah.
We're a little more tepid on that.
Not quite as excited about that.
Okay.
That's right.
I want to let you guys know, by the way, you're looking at our incredible horse trough right
here behind us.
It is, we're going to do some baptisms a little bit later.
I'm going to explain what that is.
If you're wondering about that, some of you came here like, I'm not sure what about baptism
is.
That's a weird thing.
These Christian people do.
You're going to see it.
And some of you might be like, I should do that.
By the way, it's not like an oil change.
You have to do every 3,000 miles and like, well, I haven't done it in a while.
I guess I should do it again.
You only need to do it once, you know, but whatever.
But anyway, let me just see.
The water is nice and tepid.
And so that's wonderful.
And no one will burn themselves.
And it's not cold.
Okay.
A lot to get through.
Here we go.
I have to zoom through this message.
We're in the middle of a series.
Let's start right here.
I'm going to ruin everybody.
Be really quiet.
I want you to hear something.
When you know the name of this song, if you know it, just raise your hand.
Don't shout it, but just name it.
You know the name of it.
Okay.
So, listen.
You get credit.
I'll call on you in a second.
Listen to this melody.
Jump to the next one.
This song is 15 minutes long.
I'm only going to show you a little chunk of it.
Okay.
But notice how it builds.
Stay with it.
Once you get the melody, you can hum it.
Jump to the next one.
There you go.
We're now in minute nine of this song.
This song, like I said, is 15 minutes long, and that's all it does.
The song just builds from that little phrase.
And it just builds the whole time, all the way through.
For 15 minutes.
Back here.
You raise your hand.
You know what that song is?
Bolero by Ravel.
Maurice Ravel.
Yep.
Now, here.
Yeah.
Let's close in prayer.
That's it.
Let's get some baptisms going.
Now, that song, again, it's like some of you, how many of you guys heard that song?
Maybe you didn't know what it was.
Yeah, that song.
Everybody's heard that song.
It's one of the most famous classical pieces of recent past.
I mean, it's really famous.
But the whole song, again, is just this single phrase over and over again.
The whole work adds, builds, adds, builds, until it gets to the whole orchestra doing
the same thing over and over again.
In other words, to understand that song, all you would need is that one phrase and to
see it built over and over and over again.
We'll come back to that in a minute.
Three weeks ago, we started a series, and we just started to look.
Let's reimagine the Bible a little bit, which is such a strange piece of ancient literature,
you know, 1500 years, 40 or so different authors in different places and settings and times.
And it's hard for us to read the Bible because we're not reading it as an original audience
member.
We're 21st century Western kind of world people looking back at this thing.
We're not the original audience.
And one of the sort of Bible scholar, a guy named John Walton, says, look, the Bible
is for us, 100% Bible's for us.
But it's not to us.
The Bible was definitely written for us, but it's not written to us.
And so that makes it a little bit of a challenge.
But we know Christians, they have high regard for the Bible.
They'll say things like this.
This is the Bible saying, this is what people believe about the Bible.
It's in the Bible.
Hebrews 412, for the word of God is alive and active, sharper than any double edged sword.
It penetrates even to the dividing soul and to spirit, joints and marrow.
It judges the thoughts and attitudes of the heart.
Now, if people believe, then Hebrews 412 just says, if people believe that it actually did all this stuff,
that's a pretty high level of importance for some words, that they actually can do all of these things.
So Christians are known for people who have a high regard for the Bible.
But some of you might be like, look, the Bible is maybe sort of wonderful,
but it just sort of feels like a collection of mythological stories,
and I don't really know about that.
Others of you might say, well, the Bible might be valuable,
but it just, I mean, come on, let's get it with the times here.
It's for different people.
You just said, Jeff, it's not to us.
It's written to people a long time ago.
Maybe it needs a little updating, a little freshening up.
For a lot of people, that's sort of their belief.
Other people might say, look, and this might be a larger portion of us.
People are like, the Bible is really good, but it's so unapproachable.
It's just so very much unapproachable.
And as we think about it, the Bible, as we've been saying,
maybe one of the ways we got to reimagine or rethink about the Bible
is less as a book and more as a bookstore,
or maybe perhaps like a library with different sections.
Because if we were to look at it, here are the different sections of the Bible.
All of them have different kinds of writing styles.
Each one of them requires its own unique way of looking at it.
You couldn't read the writings on narrative the same way you'd read the writings on prophecy
or gospels or et cetera, things like that.
So once again, between law and narrative and prayer and wisdom and prophecy
and gospels and letters and apocalyptic writing,
they're all different styles of writing.
And what we've been saying throughout the series is this.
Each section of the Bible requires its own unique approach
to understand it as best as possible.
In fact, so much confusion about the Bible
often comes with the fact that people have complicated it
by coming to a particular section with the wrong approach.
And all we're trying to do in this particular series
is to kind of say, let's just try to make sure our approach is lined up
with the thing that we're reading.
Now, one section of the Bible, I think it's probably the toughest section
of all of the Bible writing to read.
It is complicated largely because a lot of it is written in poetic language.
It references things that we have no idea what they're talking about,
because again, to us but not to us.
But as we look at it, I just want to show you,
when we get to this kind of reading,
what you're going to see over and over again is a phrase.
Over and over and over again, like Polaro,
that starts small and begins to build and build and build.
And I'll show you what that is in a moment.
But when you read this most confusing kind of writing,
which is called prophetic writing in the Bible,
when you read it, it is so helpful to understand that single phrase.
Now, most people, so by the way, to just give you a sense,
in the Bible there are 16 books of the Bible that are written
that would fall into this category, prophetic writing.
Four major prophets and 12 minor prophets.
They're not because they're minor, because they're less important.
It just usually has to do with their length, mostly.
But anyway, here's a list of them.
The ones that are in the yellow, the yellow, orange color,
that's all of the major prophets.
So Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel.
Daniel is the other one that has an asterisk there,
because some people put that book in particular in another category.
But thank you for kneeling down, by the way.
That was really helpful. No one saw you.
Yeah, that was great.
Anyway, I know you're trying not to have anybody draw attention to that.
It's okay.
Anyways, there we go.
The other 12 of those are simply referred to sometimes as just the 12.
You'll see it actually referred to as the 12.
These are the minor prophets.
Now, for most people, when you talk about prophetic writing,
most people have the impression that we talk about prophecy.
If you looked it up like a definition of prophecy or prophetic writing,
inevitably the first definition you would find would be
talking about or predicting events in the future that happen at some point in the future.
But here's what's so interesting.
When it comes to the prophetic writing in the Bible,
only 1% of the predictions that are in the Bible have yet to occur.
There are lots of people that you might know or come across.
You might even be a person who really loves the idea of future prediction in the Bible,
and there's definitely some of that,
but it's really an overwhelming minority of the amount of things that are in the Bible about future prediction.
Only 1% of stuff hasn't happened yet.
Here's some really conservative Bible scholars on the subject.
These guys wrote a book called How to Read the Bible for All It's Worth.
Really good book.
It's not thrilling, not a page turner, not great summer pool reading,
but it is, in fact, really helpful.
But anyway, it often happens that many Christians refer to the prophetic books
only for their predictions about the coming of Jesus.
Now, what people would read the Bible prophecy books for
is they would try to read it only as if it's anticipating Jesus,
who doesn't show up in his ministry depending on which prophet you're reading,
between 400 and 700 years.
So these are what these guys are saying.
It happens that many Christians refer to the prophetic books
only for predictions about the coming of Jesus,
as though the prediction of events far distant from their own day
was the main concern of these prophets.
In fact, using the prophets in this way is highly selective.
Consider the following statistics.
Less than 2% of Old Testament prophecy.
Old Testament is the part of the Bible that concerns God and His relationship
with His own people before the ministry of Jesus,
the life and ministry of Jesus and the early church.
That's the New Testament.
Old Testament is about God and His relationship with His people
before the ministry and life of Jesus.
Now, less than 2% of Old Testament prophecy is messianic.
That is to say, referring to a Messiah that's supposed to come.
Less than 1% concerns events yet to come in our time.
The prophets then did indeed announce the future,
but it was usually the immediate future of Israel,
which is the northern kingdom of Israel,
Judah, which is the southern kingdom,
and other nations surrounding them that they announced rather than our future.
Meaning, there's so many people who have an obsession
with only about 1% of the content of the writing,
which means that when it comes to prophetic writing,
it's referring to something else altogether.
In fact, something that would be way more helpful to look at it
if you ever come across some of this writing in the Bible,
is to look at it a little bit differently.
Now, to say it simply, prophetic writing is about God's word spoken
to God's spokesperson to God's people.
That's the simplest way to talk about what prophetic writing is.
A prophet is simply a person who's been appointed by God
to speak his words to his people.
And it's, like I said, only rarely is it about future stuff.
Like, that hasn't happened. It's very rare.
Now, when it comes to the actual tone of this writing,
when we're talking about the prophetic writing tone,
it's highly confrontational.
It is unbelievably confrontational.
Because God's people were intended to have a relationship with God
that looks kind of like wedding vows.
We talked about this in the beginning of the series,
you know, about what it means. It's called the covenant.
And there's covenant, what are called stipulations, or vows.
And they're saying, it's going to be you and us, God.
We're going to be together.
And they set up these terms and they're going to have this agreement.
And the prophets come around and they go, hey, wait a second.
You guys are supposed to keep up your end of the bargain
and sort of be a part of this relationship
in the way that you intended.
So it's always confrontational.
They're like, look, you stopped caring for the poor, the orphan in the widow,
which is like the trifecta of the most marginalized people.
You aren't caring for the poor, the orphan in the widow anymore.
Or you've made some other idols and you're worshiping them.
Or you're practicing some kind of permission, you know,
immorality, whatever it might be for yourselves.
And so the prophets words are not welcome words.
People aren't like, yay, a prophet's here.
They're always being confronted.
In fact, here's an example of some people having a conversation
in the Bible about prophets and how they feel about them.
Check this out. This is in 1 Kings 22, verse 7.
Jehoshaphat asked, is there no longer a prophet of the Lord here
whom we can inquire of?
The king of Israel answered Jehoshaphat, oh, there is still one prophet
through whom we can inquire of the Lord.
But I hate him because he never prophesies anything good about me
but always bad.
I don't want to ask that guy.
He always says things I don't want to hear.
This is over and over again.
To be a prophet is to be a person who's generally hated
because all that person does is show up and say,
you guys aren't getting it right.
Over and over again.
Christi Anyabouleh in her book literally says it like this.
I love this.
God used prophets to speak the cold hard truth to God's cold hard people.
Over and over again, you see this.
The content of the prophetic messages is always what people needed to hear
but what they rarely wanted to hear.
It's what people needed to hear but what they rarely wanted to hear.
Now, when we talk about the prophets, it's important to understand,
we talked about this in the second week of the series,
about the idea of this last week,
about how the whole Bible fits into a giant narrative framework.
I want to show you what that is once again.
If you weren't here with us, here it is really quickly.
First, God is the good creator and sustainer of all things.
Second, God's people, God and people form an unlikely and unequal partnership with Him.
Third, people break the partnership with God.
At some point, they're like, we're kind of tired of this.
Four, life apart from God results in exile.
It means they get deported out of their own homes or invasion.
People come in and take them out like they take them over.
Five, by the way, people regret their decision
and then six, God restores the partnership.
You can see this cover to cover in the Bible.
If you get this sort of framework, you understand the Bible a lot.
You see, you don't even kneel down, just walk right out.
There you go, head on out.
Now, what I said was helpful for us before is this,
and I meant it and it is a little bit goofy,
but if you think about the basic plot line as a romantic comedy,
it really helps you to understand,
which I know a lot of you are going to be watching romantic comedy on Father's Day.
I just know it's a typical tradition in a lot of people's homes.
No, just kidding.
Now, when you talk about the prophets, when they show up,
it's the same part in a movie, in a romantic comedy,
when the person, the protagonist, breaks up with whoever they're with.
He breaks up with her, she breaks up with him,
they go back to their old life.
Then, inevitably, what you have is another person will say,
are you crazy? That's the best thing that ever happened to you.
It's a secondary character, a tertiary character,
is like, you should not have broken up with that person.
You've never been better in your whole life.
I can't believe you broke up with that person.
You've got to get back with them.
That's what the prophets say in these chunks of that story.
The people are like, I'm done with this partnership,
and they end up in sort of exile or invasion,
and then people regret their decision, and the prophets are like,
no, no, no, wait, come back, come back, come back.
That's the language.
But there are other pictures of God's people and their relationship, too,
that isn't just sort of this romantic comedy kind of picture,
although that's really prominent.
In fact, that's the third most used sort of reference to God and his people
is as a husband and a wife.
That's actually how he describes his relationship.
The first most used picture is of a shepherd and a sheep.
This is the relationship God has with his people.
He's over and over again in the prophets.
But the second most used one,
which is maybe particularly significant today,
is that it's a father and child.
Throughout the writing of the prophets, there is this constant theme.
Again, you see that sort of begins to get developed,
and one of the things is as a father and a child.
Here's Hosea chapter 11, verse 1 says this,
Israel was a child. I loved him.
Notice the language.
And out of Egypt, I called my son,
but the more they were called, the more they went away from me.
You get this very clear picture of what prophecy actually is.
Israel is called a child,
and out of Egypt, I called my son,
but then they wandered away.
They broke up with me.
Now, what's so incredible to think about this
is that if you have a picture of this idea of this sort of confrontational tone,
but as a father to his own kids,
you could describe that or characterize it as simply tough love.
Now, some of you have been,
someone just treated you like a jerk and they're like,
that's just tough love. That might not have been true.
Being a jerk is not the same thing as being tough love.
Just make sure we're all on the same page.
The operative thing here is love.
It is not licensed to be a jerk,
but part of loving another person sometimes
is having the willingness to say the tough things.
Having the willingness to say the tough things.
That's different than the way the world is now.
The world would sort of basically categorize love
as a kind of blind acceptance and aloof permissiveness.
And if you were ever to say something,
I don't know if that's okay,
then that makes you an unloving person in the world's eyes,
but we know that there is something really true about the idea
that sometimes we need to hear the tough things because of love.
And when we encounter them in the Bible,
these tough things, it's so unbelievably important
that you and I understand that the beating heart of the Bible
is the calling of wayward kids home to their father.
The language might get really harsh.
The words might get really tough.
And if you were to extract just one or two of those words
out of the Bible, you'd be like,
what's this Bible all about?
And that's true.
But if you're to look at it in a bigger, broader sense,
that this is about God calling wayward kids home to the father,
then it becomes a little bit clearer what we're doing.
And that refrain starts to take on a little bit more shape.
And there's a command that does all of the prophets
build their particular message on.
And it's one word.
It's the word that just starts out very...
It starts really sort of simple and clean,
and it just keeps getting built on and expanding.
And that word is this word in Hebrew.
Teshuva.
Over and over and over again.
The root word of Teshuva is simply this word, turn.
All the time.
In fact, you can keep seeing it throughout the writing.
You just see this word, turn, comes up over, over again.
Return or turn.
What this looks like in the book of Hosea,
which I'll show you in a second, is this.
After a long series of painful, tough, love things
that God is saying through His prophet Hosea to His people.
I mean, if you were to read the subject headings in the book of Hosea,
you would just see which the subject headings are added way later.
You'd just see things like punishment or anger or frustration
that God has for Israel.
It's like these aren't the ones that people get tattooed
or needle point onto a thing.
These are like, wow, this is really harsh stuff.
It is really harsh.
No question about it.
But after a long series of this painful, tough, love stuff,
then comes this promise.
The very last chapter of Hosea looks like this.
I'm going to show you this.
Notice the language.
Hosea 14.
Return.
Shuv.
Return Israel to the Lord your God.
Your sins have been your downfall.
Take your words with you and return.
Shuv to the Lord.
Say to Him, forgive all our sins and receive us graciously
that we may offer the fruit of our lips.
Remember, this is the prophet speaking to the people in God's voice.
Say, forgive our sins and receive us graciously.
Assyria cannot save us.
Will not mount war horses.
Will never again say our gods to what our own hands have made.
What they're saying here is this.
They would make a thing out of wood or stone or something like that
or iron and they would say, this is our God.
Make it and then call.
This is our God.
We just made this.
What they're saying is we're not going to have these idols anymore.
We're not going to ever say again our gods to what our own hands have made.
For in you, the fatherless find compassion continues.
Then God's voice switches to his own voice.
I'll heal their waywardness and love them freely.
For my anger has turned away from them.
I'll be like the do to Israel.
He, Israel, will blossom like a lily, like a cedar of Lebanon.
He will send down his roots.
Who is wise?
Let them realize these things.
What you get is that the invitation is a coming to confess
and anticipating what God will do to receive them.
That's what that is.
That's the words of the prophet at the end of that book.
Let me just ask you though, just right now in this moment,
a tough love message from God to me might say something.
Turn from blank.
Now you might be wrong, but if you had to guess,
if there was a tough love message to you right now from God,
it might be like this.
Turn from blank.
What is it?
Is it a habit?
Is it an addiction?
Is it a kind of bitterness?
Is it a self righteous kind of judgment about other people?
Is it a sense of your own kind of elevated?
I'm so wonderful.
Isn't it great to be me?
It's too bad for everybody else.
Is it a thing you keep going back to?
You can't stop coming.
You just keep going on back to it.
You keep trying to get away from it.
And you're like a lot of us, we kind of give ourselves,
which just tends to be our typical things.
We tend to give ourselves a little bit of permission.
I'm not that, so I get to do this.
We keep going back to it.
This is true of me.
It's true of all of us.
Maybe it's, in some cases, it's a really good thing.
It's like everybody would acknowledge the thing that you keep going back to
or the thing that you hold on to is really good,
but it's become the ultimate thing.
And in that sense, it's become something that it was never intended to become.
And maybe God's just sort of saying,
maybe you ought to turn from that.
Shoo, turn.
Now, it's no surprise.
Jesus has the continuation of the same message,
even in his own teaching and his own ministry.
The same phrase comes up again.
Now, remember, here's the Hebrew word for to shoove,
or turn, shoove, turn.
That word in Greek, the Old Testament,
part of the life of the Bible,
between God and His people,
all that story before Jesus's ministry
and in the life of the early church,
which is the New Testament.
The New Testament is written, not in Hebrew, but in Greek,
and that word looks like this in Greek, metanoia.
Now, when I show you the actual English version of the word metanoia,
remember what you're looking at is turn, turn.
I'm going to show it to you,
and some of you will recognize this word,
but you've not heard it in this term before.
That word is repent.
Now, you've heard this word before, some of you,
but it sounded like this, repent.
Repent.
There was like some sort of, usually,
it had a really deep South anger kind of attached to it,
and repent, you know, like, it's like a big threat,
you know, like coming at you, and you heard it that way.
I just want to say, when you look at it
from the way that the Bible comes at it,
it's just simply saying the word metanoia
is just a whole life U turn.
I was going one direction, and I'm done going that direction,
and I'm turning the other way.
Metanoia.
Return.
Here's Jesus's own words at the very beginning
of His ministry in Mark chapter one.
The time has come, He said,
the kingdom of God has come here.
By the time it's coming, it's come to fulfillment.
The kingdom of God has come near.
Repent.
U turn, and believe the good news.
Now, with that being said,
the turn is just, when Jesus is inviting people to this,
what He's saying is, remember the big arc of the Bible,
you don't have to live like orphans anymore.
You don't have to live like orphans at all.
And in that sense, repent isn't a threat,
like maybe some of us have heard it or characterized it.
It's really an invitation to come home.
The problem with Jesus over and over again
is that people look to Jesus and are like,
you keep inviting the wrong people to come home
because they're too far gone.
Over and over again, Jesus, you keep telling people,
you can turn back, you can come back,
and the critics of Jesus always were like,
wait a second, you can't tell those people
because they have gone too far, they cannot turn.
And maybe that's how you felt about yourself.
Maybe someone made you feel that way.
Maybe you understood that God is like,
look, He's for some people, but I know what I've done,
and every single person in this room
has some measure of some secrets in here
that if people found out about Him,
we would all be devastated.
The criticism always of Jesus is that
He kept associating with people and inviting people
who everybody else had regarded as too far gone.
Over and over again, Jesus reiterates,
that's not possible to be too far gone.
What's important to keep in mind in the imitation
about sort of returning, what's so crucial to keep in mind
is returning always involves leaving,
meaning you can't stay in one place and also be in another.
But some of you might be going to Hawaii this summer,
and we're all jealous of you, that's great.
We're excited for you to go there.
But you can't decide to go there and be there
and also be here at the same time.
You're going to have to decide to leave one place
to go to another, that's what returning is.
Returning always involves leaving.
And there's also, in the early church,
there's another way of depicting this whole journey.
You know, Shuv or Teshuva takes on a dramatic symbol
and a return from an old life.
That's the way the New Testament,
the early church begins to characterize this idea
of turning around.
It's the word baptism.
The word baptism gets actually clarified here.
It looks like this.
Don't you know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus,
that's not referring to the dunking of people underwater,
or a wonderful horse trough like we have.
It's referring to something else.
The word baptism, which will get symbolized
very much quite literally, because the word baptism
means the word to immerse or to place into.
When they're talking about people being baptized into Jesus,
the way this is written here is it's saying
you have been placed into,
you have been fully immersed in the person of Christ Jesus,
as it says right here.
Through faith, you are fully immersed in the person of Jesus.
It further gets more extreme.
Again, we're talking about coming home or returning.
Don't you know that all of us who are baptized into Christ Jesus,
are put into His death.
That's weird, I understand.
Let me clarify even further.
We were therefore buried with Him through baptism into death.
In order that just as Christ was raised from the dead
through the glory of the Father,
we too may live a new life.
Now, all that is to say is,
when we, through faith in Jesus,
are put into His own life,
we're buried with Him, just like He was buried,
and then raised to walk in a new life.
Here's how I illustrate this.
Every time we do baptisms, some of you will recognize this.
Just so you get them, you're going to be really helpful.
Now, in faith, we're buried with Christ in baptism.
Remember, He died on a cross,
buried with Christ in baptism, all of our sin and death.
By the way, if you're being baptized,
it's how long it holds you under the water.
Deep breath.
At this point, buried with Christ in baptism,
raised to walk in a new life.
People are buried under the water
and raised to walk in a new life.
That's what you're doing.
Your baptism is the symbolic representation
of being baptized into Jesus.
You've been baptized into Jesus,
buried with Christ in baptism,
raised to walk in a new life.
That's all that that is.
By the way, this is our new cult wave.
If you see each other, we all know you belong.
Okay, now, anyway.
Leaving and burying old things,
being raised in a new life in Jesus.
The invitation on this Father's Day,
and you're going to see people get baptized in a minute,
the invitation, you can do it too.
You know, I haven't done this, I'm not sure if I should be baptized.
If you're not sure, but you have already said yes to Jesus,
then you should do it.
And you're like, but my hair, I'm going out to brunch.
It's fine. Everybody will think it's cool.
Don't worry about it. We'll even give you a T shirt.
So anyway, now, the invitation
on Father's Day is two words.
And if you could get this, it's the message of the prophets.
It's the summary of all the instruments
and the chorus coming together.
That same melody played all the way out
and blown up into huge ways.
The message of the prophets and the message to you
on Father's Day, in a moment we'll see the baptism
which will culminate in that baptism,
is this two word phrase.
Come home.
Some of you need to hear that.
You haven't heard that in a long time.
Come home.
Maybe for some of you, it's the first time
you get to come home to Jesus.
You never really thought about it in those terms.
You thought about it like, I got to get my act together.
Man, I got it because then I can come home.
And the invitation isn't to do that.
It's just to simply come home.
Just, hey, leave that old life and come home.
We'll take care of the rest of that stuff.
Maybe you're tired of wandering around.
Come home.
Maybe even searching for some answers
and you keep coming up.
Empty.
And we say it all the time around here.
We do not have all the answers.
We just know that we belong into a life with Jesus
for you.
That's a person for you.
You're like, I don't know what to do.
I'm feeling still pretty empty.
Come home.
Maybe you're trying to make sense of a life
that you're living.
And you're trying to figure out how to justify it
or trying to convince yourself that it feels amazing.
That it is great.
But you know deep down it's not the life that you want.
Trapped in relationships.
Lost in a particular kind of loneliness
and calling it success or calling it whatever.
Come home.
Maybe you felt unwanted or unworthy.
Every one of us in here
has cut stuff like I said.
We've all got secrets that if people knew about it
they'd be horrified.
We've all given ourselves some permission at some point.
Never too far gone.
Come home.
Baptism is a symbol of someone who has come home
who has left one place and arrived at another.
It is the transformation
that God has done but is not yet finished
in a person.
It is not magic.
It does not make someone a Christian.
It is a symbol of what God has done.
And maybe for some of you
the first step isn't
just because you've already maybe you haven't come to this first step
but the first step is probably just simply saying
I want to come home.
Maybe you celebrated with baptism
but let's start with coming home.
Would you pray with me and then we'll have some baptisms
and we'll talk about coming home.
Jesus.
In so many areas of our lives
we get lost and lonely and we wander
and we need you to come get us
so we want to leave our old life.
But sometimes we don't know how.
Father forgive us that we tried to make sense
of things in a way that we did not know what we were doing
and we screwed it up.
Forgive us. We need your forgiveness.
We want to come home.
Maybe for the first time in your life
you don't know much about the church
or the Bible or anything else
but you've got a sense that God might be calling you home
to him.
Maybe for the first time it's just yes Jesus
I want to come home.
Father though
baptism is something that maybe a lot of us have done
or maybe we've seen before
we continually live a life that is dying to old things
and stepping into new things that you call us to
by the power of your spirit Jesus.
Father we get to celebrate now
this milestone in people's lives
as they're buried with you in baptism
and raised to walk in a new life.
We're grateful that that's the work you do
in an ongoing basis in our life Jesus
in your name that we pray right now. Amen.
Folks we're going to do some baptism
this is going to be pretty cool.
If that's something you want to do and you're like I didn't plan on it
just head over there we'll get you all checked in
we'll put you in this super warm water
and we'll see you in baptism is going.
Will you stand as we celebrate
and sing together.
I could sing these songs
as I often do
every song I sing
and you never do
so I throw up my hands
and praise you again and again
all that I have is a
hallelujah
and I know it so much
I'm nothing else before a king
except for a heart singing
hallelujah
I've got wordless hearts
I've got just one move
with my eyes wide
I will worship you
so I throw up my hands
and praise you again and again
all that I have is a
hallelujah
and I know it so much
I'm nothing else before a king
except for a heart singing
hallelujah
oh we praise you
come on my soul
don't you get shy on me
lift up your song
cause you got the lion inside
of those lungs
get up and praise the Lord
come on my soul
don't you get shy on me
lift up your song
cause you got the lion inside
of those lungs
get up and praise the Lord
come on my soul
don't you get shy on me
lift up your song
cause you got the lion inside
of those lungs
get up and praise the Lord
come on
come on my soul
don't you get shy on me
lift up your song
cause you got the lion inside
of those lungs
get up and praise the Lord
come on my soul
don't you get shy on me
lift up your song
cause you got the lion inside
of those lungs
get up and praise the Lord
come on my soul
don't you get shy on me
lift up your song
cause you got the lion inside
of those lungs
Hallelujah
I know it's not much
I'm nothing else before the King
except for our hearts singing
Hallelujah
I know it's not much
I'm nothing else before the King
except for our hearts singing
Hallelujah
Come on, my soul, don't you get shy on me, lift up your soul
Cause you got a lion inside of those looks
Get up and praise alone
Come on, my soul, don't you get shy on me, lift up your soul
Cause you got a lion inside of those looks
Get up and praise alone
Come on, come on, come on, my soul
Don't you get shy on me, lift up your soul
Cause you got a lion inside of those looks
Get up and praise alone
Come on, my soul, don't you get shy on me, lift up your soul
Cause you got a lion inside of those looks
Get up and praise alone
So I throw up my hands and praise you again and again
The song that I have is a Hallelujah, Hallelujah
I know it's on but I've nothing else been born here
A step or a heart sent me in, Hallelujah, Hallelujah
So I throw up my hands and praise you again and again
The song that I have is a Hallelujah, Hallelujah
I know it's on but I've nothing else been born here
A step or a heart sent me in, Hallelujah, Hallelujah
So I throw up my hands and praise you again and again
Singing Hallelujah, Hallelujah
I know it's on but I've nothing else been born here
A step or a heart sent me in, Hallelujah, Hallelujah
I love you Lord, for your mercy never fails me
All my days I've been held in your hands
From the moment that I wake up until I lay in my head
Oh I will sing of the goodness of God
And all my life you have been faithful
And all my life you have been so, so good
Every breath that I am able
Oh I will sing of the goodness of God
And all my life you have been faithful
And all my life you have been so, so good
With every breath that I am able
Oh I will sing of the goodness of God
Amen
That's so fun
By the way, if you're a person that we don't have time to do anymore
But we have another service so in 50 minutes we can do another one
If you're like I should've done it
But if I get a message from God to get baptized
This is your message from God right now, okay
I just want to tell you this is it
This is the miraculous moment that you're waiting for
You can still do it next year
We have more service to do this
Would you receive this as a
blessing?
If you're not comfortable with
this, that's okay.
However you want to hold your
hands, that's all right.
Would you receive these words as
a blessing to you from the prophet
Isaiah who writes these words?
I made you and you are my servant.
I will not forget you.
I've swept away your offenses like
a cloud and your sins like the
morning mist.
Return to me, for I have
redeemed you.
Sing for joy, you heavens, for
the Lord has done this.
Shout aloud, you earth beneath.
Burst into song, you mountains,
you forests and all your trees
for the Lord has redeemed.
He displays his glory.
Wherever it is that you might
wander, find yourself being
wayward, lost, lonely, overwhelmed.
If you ever wonder to yourself,
I've gone too far, there is no
too far, that God's love cannot
reach.
He calls you home to him.
Whatever it is that you
encounter, may the love of the
Father and the grace of the
Son and the fellowship and
the grace of the Holy Spirit be
among you all.
In Jesus name, amen.
God bless you guys.
If you have needs for prayer,
hello to the prayer with you.
Come back next service.
We've got more baptisms to do.
God bless you.